# **JavaScript**

JavaScript (JS) is a lightweight, interpreted, or just-in-time compiled programming language with first-class functions. While it is most well-known as the scripting language for Web pages, many non-browser environments also use it, such as Node.js, Apache CouchDB and Adobe Acrobat. JavaScript is a prototype-based, multi-paradigm, single-threaded, dynamic language, supporting object-oriented, imperative, and declarative (e.g. functional programming) styles.

JavaScript's dynamic capabilities include runtime object construction, variable parameter lists, function variables, dynamic script creation (via eval), object introspection (via for...in and Object utilities), and source-code recovery (JavaScript functions store their source text and can be retrieved through toString()).


**Where You Can Run JavaScript**

Traditionally JavaScript was used inside web browsers such as Mozilla Firefox, Internet Explorer, Chrome, Opera, or Safari. The author would include some JavaScript code in the HTML page the user receives when she visits a web site. That JavaScript code would run in the browser (what we call "client side", as opposed to running on the web server which is called "server side").

In recent years people have started to put JavaScript code on the server as well. Probably the most well know environment to run JavaScript on the server is Node.js, but there are others. For example io.js which started as a Node.js fork.


**We can distinguish 3 major parts of what we usually refer to as "JavaScript".**

1.) *The language itself* - This is fairly standard among the various environments, both in the various browsers and in the various server-side environments.

2.) *The DOM API* - how the language can interact with the various parts of a web page while in the browser. While in this respect the various browsers are getting closer to each other they still differ. Several libraries, most prominently JQuery, is trying to provide a unified API.

3.) *The server API (or just API)* - provided by Node.js or one of the other server-side systems.

## **Editor or IDE**

*Any text editor can be used.*

On MS Windows you can even use the built-in plain Notepad, but I'd recommend something more powerful. You can download Notepad++ which is very similar to Notepad, but with tons of extra features, or get Aptana Studio. The latter has a steeper learning curve, so you might want to start with the more simple tool.


## **Embed or include**

You can either embed the JavaScript code directly inside the HTML file, or you can put a line in the HTML file that will include the external JavaScript file. In most cases the latter is recommended, but for our first examples, in order to make the whole thing work in a single file, we'll embed the JavaScript code inside some HTML.

In order to do that we add the **< script> opening and </ script >** closing tags. Between the two we write our JavaScript code.

## **Output**

The very first thing we need to learn is how to interact with the JavaScript code running in the browse. There are a number of way JavaScript can display text for the user (output). The most simple one is by using the **alert** function:

## **Alert**

This will show a pop-up in the browser with the text. (You can click on Try! that will open the specific script in a separate window.) The **alert()** function is actually rarely used, but it is an easy way to show the use of JavaScript.



***examples/js/alert.html***

- < script language="javascript">

- alert("Hello World");

- </ script>


*If you'd like to try it yourself, open your editor and create a file with .html extension (for example hello.html) and put the above code in the file. Then switch to your browser and open the file with the browser. (Most browsers will let you do that using the File/Open File menu option.)*

## **document.write**

***examples/js/document_write.html***


- First line
- < script>

- document.write("< h1>Hello World</ h1>");

- </ script>
- Last line

*In this example we have some text (First line), then the JavaScript code, and then some more text (Last line). The JavaScript code uses the **document.write** function to change the content of the page. It will embed the html snippet **< h1>Hello World</ h1>** after the "First line", but before the "Last line".*

*This function was often used when one wanted to change what's shown. Today, there are some more advanced techniques.*

## **console.log**

*Finally let's see how developers usually print out debugging information.*

***examples/js/console.html***

- < script>

- console.log("Hello World");

- </ script>

Most of the web browsers provide what is called a "JavaScript console". It is an additional window which is normally not visible, where the browser can print out warnings and errors generated by the execution of the JavaScript code. (E.g. if there is a syntax error in the code.) 

The developer can also print information to this console using the **console.log()** call.

In order to see the console you'll need to open it.

If you happen to use Chrome on OSX you can open the console using: **Command-Option-J.**


## **prompt**


The fist one is called **prompt**. It will show a pop-up window with the text provided as the first parameter and with a textbox the user can fill in. When the user presses **OK**, the value in the text box will be returned by the **prompt()** function. Then, in this example we use the ***document.write*** method to update the html with the text.

***examples/js/prompt.html***

- < script>

- var name = prompt("Your name:", "");
- document.write- ("Hello ", name);

- < /script>


*The textbox will be pre-filled with the content of the second parameter. This can be very useful if we would like to ask the user to edit some value. We can pre-fill the box with the old value.*

***examples/js/edit.html***

- < script>

- var name = prompt("Please correct your e-mail address:", "foo@bar.co");
- document.write("Your e-mail address is ", name);

- < /script>

*In either case, if the user presses **cancel** or hits the **ESC** the **prompt()** function will return **null**.*

## **confirm**

The other pop-up is not really an input method. It allows the developer to ask a Yes/No question. Calling the **confirm()** function will show a pop-up window with the provided texts and with two buttons. If the user presses **OK** the **confirm()** function will return **true**, if the user presses **cancel** or hits the **ESC** key, the function will return **false**.

Of course in order for this to make more sense you'll have to understand what **true** and **false** really mean and what this **if - else** construct does. If you have programming background then you probably already understand the code, and even if you don't have programming background you might figure out.

That code can basically be translated to the following English sentence:

**If confirm returned true, print "Hello World", otherwise print "OK, I won't print it."**

Or even better:

**If the user presses OK when we asked "Shall I print Hello World?", then print "Hello World", otherwise print "OK, I won't print it."**


***examples/js/confirm.html***

- < script>

- if (confirm("Shall I print Hello World?")) {
    document.write("Hello World");
- } else {
    document.write("OK, I won't print it.");
- }

- < /script>

# **4 Ways to Declare a JavaScript Variable:**


- Using **var**
- Using **let**
- Using **const**
- Using nothing


## **What are Variables?**

Variables are containers for storing data (storing data values).

In this example, **x**, **y**, and **z**, are variables, declared with the **var** keyword:


***Example***

- var x = **5**;
- var y = **6**;
- var z = x + y;


In this example, **x**, **y**, and **z**, are variables, declared with the **let** keyword:

***Example**

- let x = **5**;
- let y = **6**;
- let z = x + y;

In this example, **x**, **y**, and **z**, are undeclared variables:

***Example***

- x = **5**;
- y = **6**;
- z = x + y;

From all the examples above, you can guess:

- x stores the value 5
- y stores the value 6
- z stores the value 11


## **When to Use JavaScript var?**


Always declare JavaScript variables with **var**, **let**, or **const**.

The **var** keyword is used in all JavaScript code from 1995 to 2015.

The **let** and **const** keywords were added to JavaScript in 2015.

If you want your code to run in older browsers, you must use **var**.


## **When to Use JavaScript const?**


If you want a general rule: always declare variables with **const**.

If you think the value of the variable can change, use **let**.

In this example, **price1**, **price2**, and **total**, are variables:


***Example***

- const price1 = **5**;
- const price2 = **6**;
- let total = price1 + price2;


The two variables **price1** and **price2** are declared with the **const** keyword.

These are constant values and cannot be changed.

The variable **total** is declared with the **let** keyword.

This is a value that can be changed.

## **Just Like Algebra**


Just like in algebra, variables hold values:

- let x = **5**;
- let y = **6**;

Just like in algebra, variables are used in expressions:

- let z = x + y;

From the example above, you can guess that the total is calculated to be 11.



# **Note**
*Variables are containers for storing values.*



# **JavaScript Identifiers**

All JavaScript variables must be identified with unique names.

These unique names are called identifiers.

Identifiers can be short names (like x and y) or more descriptive names (age, sum, totalVolume).


***The general rules for constructing names for variables (unique identifiers) are:***

- Names can contain letters, digits, underscores, and dollar signs.

- Names must begin with a letter.

- Names can also begin with $ and _ (but we will not use it in this tutorial).

- Names are case sensitive (y and Y are different variables).

- Reserved words (like JavaScript keywords) cannot be used as names.



## **Note**

*JavaScript identifiers are case-sensitive.*



# **The Assignment Operator**

In JavaScript, the equal sign (=) is an "assignment" operator, not an "equal to" operator.

This is different from algebra. The following does not make sense in algebra:

- x = x + 5

*In JavaScript, however, it makes perfect sense: it assigns the value of x + 5 to x.*

(It calculates the value of x + 5 and puts the result into x. The value of x is incremented by 5.)



## **Note**

The "equal to" operator is written like == in JavaScript.



# **JavaScript Data Types**

JavaScript variables can hold numbers like 100 and text values like "John Doe".

In programming, text values are called **text strings**.


JavaScript can handle many types of data, but for now, just think of **numbers** and **strings**.

- Strings are written inside double or single quotes. Numbers are written without quotes.

***If you put a number in quotes, it will be treated as a *text string*.***

## **Example**

- const pi = 3.14;

- let person = "John Doe";

- let answer = 'Yes I am!';



# **Declaring a JavaScript Variable**

Creating a variable in JavaScript is called **"declaring"** a variable.

You declare a JavaScript variable with the var or the let keyword:

- var carName;
or:

- let carName;


After the declaration, the variable has no value (technically it is undefined).

To assign a value to the variable, use the equal sign:

- carName = "Volvo";

You can also assign a value to the variable when you declare it:

- let carName = "Volvo";

In the example below, we create a variable called carName and assign the value "Volvo" to it.

Then we "output" the value inside an HTML paragraph with **id="demo"*:

## **Example**

- < p id="demo"></ p>

- < script>

- let carName = "Volvo";

- document.getElementById("demo").innerHTML = carName;

- < /script>


## **Note**

It's a good programming practice to declare all variables at the beginning of a script.

One Statement, Many Variables
You can declare many variables in one statement.

Start the statement with let and separate the variables by comma:

## **Example**

- let person = "John Doe", carName = "Volvo", price = 200;

A declaration can span multiple lines:

## **Example**


- let person = "John Doe",
carName = "Volvo",
price = 200;
Value = undefined
In computer programs, variables are often declared without a value. The value can be something that has to be calculated, or something that will be provided later, like user input.

A variable declared without a value will have the value undefined.

The variable carName will have the value undefined after the execution of this statement:

Example
let carName;
Re-Declaring JavaScript Variables
If you re-declare a JavaScript variable declared with var, it will not lose its value.

The variable carName will still have the value "Volvo" after the execution of these statements:

Example
var carName = "Volvo";
var carName;
Note
You cannot re-declare a variable declared with let or const.

This will not work:

let carName = "Volvo";
let carName;
JavaScript Arithmetic
As with algebra, you can do arithmetic with JavaScript variables, using operators like = and +:

Example
let x = 5 + 2 + 3;
You can also add strings, but strings will be concatenated:

Example
let x = "John" + " " + "Doe";
Also try this:

Example
let x = "5" + 2 + 3;
Note
If you put a number in quotes, the rest of the numbers will be treated as strings, and concatenated.

Now try this:

Example
let x = 2 + 3 + "5";
JavaScript Dollar Sign $
Since JavaScript treats a dollar sign as a letter, identifiers containing $ are valid variable names:

Example
let $ = "Hello World";
let $$$ = 2;
let $myMoney = 5;
Using the dollar sign is not very common in JavaScript, but professional programmers often use it as an alias for the main function in a JavaScript library.

In the JavaScript library jQuery, for instance, the main function $ is used to select HTML elements. In jQuery $("p"); means "select all p elements".

JavaScript Underscore (_)
Since JavaScript treats underscore as a letter, identifiers containing _ are valid variable names:

Example
let _lastName = "Johnson";
let _x = 2;
let _100 = 5;
Using the underscore is not very common in JavaScript, but a convention among professional programmers is to use it as an alias for "private (hidden)" variables.






Seven data types that are primitives:
Boolean. true and false.
null. A special keyword denoting a null value. (Because JavaScript is case-sensitive, null is not the same as Null, NULL, or any other variant.)
undefined. A top-level property whose value is not defined.
Number. An integer or floating point number. For example: 42 or 3.14159.
BigInt. An integer with arbitrary precision. For example: 9007199254740992n.
String. A sequence of characters that represent a text value. For example: "Howdy".
Symbol. A data type whose instances are unique and immutable.
and Object
Although these data types are relatively few, they enable you to perform useful operations with your applications. Functions are the other fundamental elements of the language. While functions are technically a kind of object, you can think of objects as named containers for values, and functions as procedures that your script can perform.